All right.
So now we're going to get into an actual legit programming language.
Each team is a markup language and CSSA is a style sheet language.
Both used to physically display content javascript on the other hand is a high level programming language
that's used mostly to create interactive effects in the browser.
Now we are able to run javascript on the server with no Jey apps and also in other non-web based environments
like PTF documents sites specific browsers and desktop widgets but we're not going to get into that
in this section.
So we're basically going to be looking at client side javascript in the browser.
All right.
Now when we classified programming languages with certain terms Javascript has qualities that can be
described using a whole wide range of terms.
So first it's a scripting language and a scripting language is a programming language that supports
scripts or programs written for a special runtime environment that automate the execution of tasks.
So it doesn't do something and wait and then do something else.
It has a script to follow it executes those tasks until the script is finished.
And in the case of javascript this all happens within your web browser.
Right.
It's also known as an interpreted language which means that it doesn't have to be compiled into machine
code for the system to run it.
This is opposed to a language that's compiled like C++ or Java or some of the other high level languages.
And by the way you probably already know this but Javascript has absolutely nothing to do with the Java
programming language javascript is also an untyped language.
And what that means is that it doesn't use a static type system where all of all variables and objects
have to be specifically assigned to a type such as in a string or an integer or something like that.
There are supersets of javascript such as typescript that can use types but javascript alone does not.
All right.
So when you create a variable you don't have to worry about assigning it to a string or whatever.
Javascript is also considered to be multi-paradigm which means that you can code in different ways.
So it's object oriented at heart.
Everything in javascript is an object for the most part.
It's prototype based.
Classes are available in the newer 6 version which is the late the latest stable version.
But that's something that is very new.
It can also be used as an imperative language which uses statements that can change a program state.
And then it's also used as a good old fashioned functional language which is just code composed of a
set of functions.
So javascript uses the ECMAScript specification.
It's essentially a set of rules standardized by Eckman International which is a nonprofit standards
organization for information and communication systems.
Now Javascript isn't the only language that uses this standard you also have js script which is kind
of Microsoft's adaptation of javascript action script and then some others.
All right so here are some notable versions of ECMAScript and Javascript E.S. five was standardized
back in 2009 and it has pretty much complete compatibility in just about every browser.
This is the most common version and what we'll be looking at mostly now iOS 6 also called E.S. 2015
added a bunch of new features like classes aero functions generators modules EMC 6 features are not
all compatible with some of the modern browsers.
So in order to use them sometimes you have to use some additional tools such as Bayville which can take
that ESX coding can and compile it into S-5 so that it can run in different versions of different browsers
and then iOS 7 or iest 2016 is the most recent version but still it's still in the works.
And again you would need to implement other technologies to compile it down to either E.S. 5 or even
iOS 6.
All right so now we're going to take a look at some of the JavaScript syntax.
I'm going to go through that and go through some of the syntax very very briefly but we will get into
more of it as we go along.
All right so javascript syntax is a set of rules for how javascript programs are built.
Javascript uses most of the usual instructions and syntax that many programming languages use such as
variables expressions arrays objects loops conditionals comparison's switches and functions.
All right just to name a few.
So when we talk about javascript output there's a few different things that we can do.
We'll probably use console log the most and what this does is it will print whatever we ask it to out
to the console within a browser or even within a terminal.
For instance in Chrome if you hit F 12 it'll open up the chrome tools and you can use the console there.
We also have window dog alert or just alert which will display content in an alert box that pops up
in the browser.
We have documented darte right which can display content within a script tag in the each team now and
then we also have enraged him now which we can use by accessing an aged female element with document
dot get element by D and then output it to that element.
So variables are used to store values.
Javascript uses the VAR keyword to declare variables and an equal sign to assign value.
So if you look down here you can see we have var X so we're creating a variable called X and you want
to add your lines with a semi-colon.
Here we're saying that X is going to be equal to the integer or the number 100 and you can make this
shorter by just saying var X equals 100 if you'd like.
Now there are some rules to variables.
They are case sensitive.
So make sure you're aware of that variables can contain letters numbers underscores and dollar signs
symbols.
OK but they must begin with either a letter underscore a dollar sign you can't begin a variable with
a number.
All right.
And that's that's pretty much universal for a lot of the popular programming languages.
Now an expression is just a combination of values variables and operators which computes a value.
So any of these are expressions two times five.
You can also have variables X times 5 and strings.
So here is saying hello world.
And the plus sign is used to concatenate.
You can concatenate strings or javascript whether it's a variable or a function whatever it may be comments
are really easy.
This is a single line comment.
You want to use the double forward slash and then if you need to use more than one line you can use
the slash asterisk and end it with asterisks slash and you can put your comment on as many lines as
needed arrays so if you have any experience with any other programming languages then you probably have
used arrays before they allow us to store multiple values into a single variable.
So in this example we have a variable called names and we're setting it to an array with four different
names.
All right.
And notice that it has.
Uses square brackets and if they're strings they have to be in quotes k if their numbers they don't
have to be strings do.
And then here if we want to access let's say Bob we can console log names and then 0.
OK this pertains to the index of the value in the array.
Now it's zero.
Arrays are zero based so if you want to access Bob that would be zero.
Jim would be one.
Jose to Paul of 3 and so on.
OK so just remember that arrays are zero based.
Next we have loops loops can execute a block of code as long as the condition is true and then it will
repeat that until the condition is no longer true.
So there's a couple of kinds.
Different kinds of loops we have a for loop.
C using the four key word and we're setting three different parameters we're setting high to zero.
And then we're saying as long as I is less than 10 then we're going to run this code and we're also
going to increment it by one by saying I plus plus.
So essentially this is going to console log whatever AI is.
And each time it goes through it's going to add 1 to it because we're incrementing it.
All right.
So as long as it's less than 10 this will keep running once it hits 10 then it'll stop.
This while loop does the same exact thing it's just a different format.
You want the while keyword put in the condition.
Do what you're going to do in this case console log and then just increment objects so everything almost
everything in Javascript can be considered an object.
Objects have properties and methods and methods is kind of a fancy way of just saying function right.
So we're going to go over this in depth later on.
But if you want to create an object with some properties you can see we're creating an object called
person and we have these curly braces that's going to define it as an object and then we have different
properties.
OK in this case we have name age and hair color.
Now strings should be in quotes either double or single and a numbers don't have to be in quotes to
access a property we can simply say person dog name and that will access this property here.
And of course we can do person dog age or person dog hair color in this case and then if there a method
attached to to an object you can also use the dot syntax here.
So this would call the get name method on the person object conditionals and if statements.
These work just like and if statements in any other programming language they'll run a block of code
if something's true.
All right so in this case we have a variable called X which is equal to 10.
And we're going to say if x is greater than 5 then we're going to console log the word.
Yes.
OK.
And x is greater than 5 it's 10.
So this would run we can also attach an else in case it's not true.
So if x is greater than 5 say Yes else if it's not then we're going to sing no switch can select one
of many blocks of code to execute.
And this is often used as an alternative for an IF statement.
In this case we're testing the value of x and we as we apply different cases to it.
So if it's one if X equals one then this will go ahead and run.
It's just going to print out.
Yes X is one.
And then it's important that we break out of that as well.
OK if it's true it's going to console log that and default basically happens if none of the above cases
are true.
So in this case we're going to log.
No X is not 1 or 2 functions are blocks of code designed to run some kind of task.
They can be created and then invoked later on in this case we're creating a function called Say hello
I can see that we need to have our parentheses here.
And then a set of curly braces inside here you can do whatever you'd like in this case we're just going
to log the text Hello world.
You can also use parameters.
OK so here you can see we have a parameter called greeting.
So when we at when we run this function we can actually pass a value into it and it'll console log that
value.
All right so that I know that that was very very brief but don't worry about it we're going to hit on
all of those aspects of javascript as we move along.
And I'll see you in the next video.